Cholinergic symptoms and QTc prolongation following donepezil overdose
A. Pourmanda,⁎,C .S h a ya,W .R e d h aa,b,c,A .A a l a ma,b,c, M. Mazer-Amirshahid,e
aDepartment of Emergency Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, United States
bDepartment of Emergency, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdul Aziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
cDepartment of Emergency Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, United States
dDepartment of Emergency Medicine, MedStar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC, United States
eGeorgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, United States
abstract article info
Article history:
Received 9 April 2017Received in revised form 21 June 2017Accepted 21 June 2017
Available online xxxxDonepezil is the most commonly prescribed acetylcholinesterase inhibitor for the treatment of Alzheimer's
disease, an ailment that affects millions of older adult patients. By inhibiting the breakdown of acetylcholine in
the central nervous system, donepezil has been shown to slow cognitive decline and improve patients' functionalstatus. While donepezil is well-tolerated and generally considered safe at therapeutic doses, taking more than the
prescribed dose could result in adverse cholinergic effects that range from mild gastrointestinal distress to serious
cardiac dysrhythmias. We present a case of an 84-year-old man who developed gastrointestinal and cardiac dis-turbances after ingesting seven-times his daily dose of donepezil. As no speci ﬁc antidote is available for donepezil
overdose, this case highlights the importance of supportive care with particular attention to the management ofcardiac dysrhythmias in patients displaying signs of toxicity.
© 2016 Published by Elsevier Inc.Keywords:
DonepezilAlzheimer's diseaseQTcBradycardia
1. Introduction
Donepezil (Aricept®) is a reversible, piperidine-based acetylcholin-
esterase (AChE) inhibitor used to slow the cognitive deterioration in pa-
tients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). It is approved to treat both mild to
moderate AD and, at higher doses, to treat moderate to severe AD [1].
AD is the most common cause of dementia in the older adult population[2]. It is projected that by 2050, there will be 13.8 million people in the
United States who suffer from the disorder [3]. Donepezil is the most
commonly prescribed treatment for AD [4]. It increases concentrations
of acetylcholine in the central nervous system by blocking the enzymethat breaks it down, acetylcholinesterase (AChE) [5]. Use of donepezil
in patients with AD has been associated with improved daily function-ing, decreased cognitive decline, and a greater delay in the need for ad-
mission to a nursing home [4].M o r er e c e n t l y ,i t se f ﬁcacy has also been
proven for use in patients with vascular dementia [6].O t h e rA C h Ei n h i b -
itors that are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
for the treatment of AD include rivastigmine and galantamine [7].
Donepezil is generally well tolerated at therapeutic dosages [6].A l -
though data are limited to case reports, the most commonly reportedadverse effects in overdose include gastrointestinal disturbances, leth-
argy, and bradycardia. While donepezil acts preferentially on centralAChE, these adverse effects demonstrate that the drug increases cholin-
ergic activity in the peripheral nervous system as well. Of particular con-
cern is the effect of donepezil on the cardiovascular system [8,9,10] .W e
report a case of donepezil overdose in a patient who presented to theemergency department (ED) with diarrhea, increased oral secretions,
bradycardia, and prolonged QTc.
2. Case report
An 84-year-old man with a past medical history of AD, hypertension,
prior stroke, and benign prostatic hyperplasia inadvertently ingested
35 mg (7 doses of his daily 5 mg tablets) of donepezil. He was presented
to the ED 6 –7 h after the ingestion. Upon arrival, the patient was
complaining of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, and excessive sweat-ing. His initial vital signs were: blood pressure 131/58 mmHg, heart rate
50 beats/min, respiratory rate 16 breaths/min, oxygen saturation 98%
on room air, and temperature 98.2 °F. He was awake and alert but con-
fused, making it dif ﬁcult to differentiate from his baseline dementia. His
pupils were miotic bilaterally but reactive to light. He also had increasedoral secretions causing him to spit frequently. His lungs were clear toauscultation bilaterally and bowel sounds were normal. His electrocar-
diogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm at a rate of 70 beats/min with pre-
mature atrial contractions, and a prolonged QTc at 502 ms. ( Fig. 1 )T h e
patient had no prior history of QTc prolongation and was not on anyother medications known to cause QTc prolongation. During the ED
stay, his heart rate ﬂuctuated between 50 and 60 beats/min. His com-
plete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel were normal.American Journal of Emergency Medicine xxx (2016) xxx –xxx
⁎Corresponding author at: Department of Emergency Medicine, George Washington
University, Medical Center, 2120 L St., Washington, DC 20037, United States.
E-mail addresses: pourmand@email.gwu.edu (A. Pourmand), pourmand@gwu.edu
(M. Mazer-Amirshahi).YAJEM-56772; No of Pages 3
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
American Journal of Emergency Medicine
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ajem
Please cite this article as: Pourmand A, et al, Cholinergic symptoms and QTc prolongation following donepezil overdose, American Journal of
Emergency Medicine (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2017.06.044http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2017.06.044
0735-6757/© 2016 Published by Elsevier Inc.

The patient was admitted to the hospital in a telemetry bed, and
observed for the next 48 h. He received intravenous ﬂuids and his
daily dose of donepezil was withheld. The patient received one dose ofatropine 0.5 mg intravenously for bradycardia with a heart rate below
50 beats/min. During the hospital course, his QTc interval decreased to
normal range. His bradycardia resolved and his repeat ECG revealed a
normal sinus rhythm with a rate of 75 beats/min. At this juncture,
case management provided the patient with services for a home health
aide to assist with medications and follow up with his primary care
physician.
3. Discussion
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are considered ﬁrst-line agents for
the treatment of AD because they slow cognitive decline and improve
functional status [11]. Donepezil is the only AChE inhibitor approved
for use in all stages of the disease [11]. The most frequently reported ad-
verse effects of donepezil at therapeutic doses include nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and sedation [4]. These adverse effects can be attributed to the
drug's inadvertent inhibition of peripheral AChE, which can lead tocholinergic crisis.
There have been several published case studies of donepezil toxicity
in the elderly since the drug's approval in 1996. Greene et al. reported a
case of a 74-year-old female who developed nausea, vomiting, drowsi-
ness, ﬂushing and diarrhea after she ingested 45 mg of donepezil. She
returned to baseline after a day of observation at home [8]. Shepherd
et al. reported a case of a 79-year-old nursing home patient who
accidentally ingested 50 mg of donepezil, a tenfold increase in her
usual 5-mg dose, which resulted in persistent bradycardia as well as
nausea and vomiting. She required a total of 3 mg of atropine in order
for her heartrate to return to baseline, and she returned home on day
2 after ingestion [9].
Even at therapeutic doses, the cholinergic actions of donepezil
appear to induce adverse side effects on the cardiovascular system.
Tanaka et al. reported 2 cases of bradycardia and QTc prolongation in
patients who ingested therapeutic doses of 5 –10 mg/day. The ﬁrst
patient, a 90-year-old male, experienced 2:1 atrioventicular blockand complete right bundle-branch block, while the other patient, an87 year-old female, experienced torsade de pointes leading to ventricu-larﬁbrillation. These cardiac disturbances completely resolved upon
discontinuation of the drug. In both cases, donepezil had not beenused in combination with other drugs that might have affected the
QTc interval; however, it was unclear whether or not these patients
may have had prior cardiac conduction disturbances [12].T a k a y ae ta l .
reported an 83-year-old female with a documented history of myocar-dial infarction who was being treated for two years with 5 mg donepezil
for AD and experienced an episode of vomiting and syncope and was
admitted to the hospital, where she experienced two further episodes
of syncope with ECG-con ﬁrmed torsades de pointes. This patient re-
quired treatment with potassium chloride, magnesium sulfate, and lido-
caine [13]. Given the occurrence of QTc prolongation in patients who are
taking therapeutic doses of donepezil, it can be suggested that certainpopulations are particularly sensitive to the cardiac effects of AChE
inhibitors, and these populations may have an underlying cardiac pre-
disposition to QTc-prolongation and/or syncope.
Other cholinesterase inhibitors approved for ﬁrst-line therapy for
the treatment of mild-to-moderate AD include galantamine and
rivastigmine. Donepezil may be relatively safer in overdose compared
to other cholinesterase inhibitors [14]. It has a high degree of selectivity
for the central nervous system, making peripheral cholinergic crisis lesslikely to occur. A longer half-life may have the bene ﬁt of easier dosing,
but it also means that the cholinergic adverse effects are longer lasting.This is particularly true for pediatric populations. In one report by
Garlich et al. a 14-month boy ingested one of his grandfather's 10 mg
donepezil tablets and subsequently experienced somnolence and inter-
mittent episodes of asymptomatic bradycardia [10]. He required obser-
vation in the pediatric intensive care unit for a total of ﬁve days before
r
eturning to baseline. These authors concluded that the excess choliner-
gic activity enhanced the toddler's sensitivity to vagal tone, leading totransient bradycardia. This patient's clinical course parallels that of
elderly patients who experienced brady-dysrhythmias, suggesting that
donepezil affects vagal tone.
In the clinical course of donepezil overdose, a few recommendations
can be made in terms of management; although the optimal manage-
ment is poorly de ﬁned due to limited data. Asymptomatic individuals
with small, unintentional ingestions can be cleared in the ED with ECG
Fig. 1. Electrocardiogram with premature atrial contractions, and prolonged QT.2 A. Pourmand et al. / American Journal of Emergency Medicine xxx (2016) xxx –xxx
Please cite this article as: Pourmand A, et al, Cholinergic symptoms and QTc prolongation following donepezil overdose, American Journal of
Emergency Medicine (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2017.06.044

and cardiac monitoring. Physicians should consider hospitalization
when signs of altered mental status or excessive peripheral cholinergic
symptoms are observed. Symptomatic individuals and those with inten-
tional ingestions necessitate observation and may require supportive
measures to compensate for ﬂuid loss and to correct electrolyte imbal-
ances. For patients who present early within an hour of ingestion oflarger toxic doses, activated charcoal can be considered in order to pre-vent drug absorption in patients with an intact airway. Atropine should
be administered based on standard protocols for clinically signi ﬁcant
symptoms of cholinergic toxicity such as symptomatic bradycardiaand respiratory secretions. Transcutaneous cardiac pacing may also be
required if patient is hemodynamically unstable secondary to bradycar-
dia. In light of the adverse cardiac effects of the drug, continuous cardiac
monitoring should be considered. Particular attention should be paid to
patients with predisposing factors for QTc-prolongation and torsades de
pointes, as it is still unclear as to whether or not donepezil ingestion is
related to these events.
Author disclosure statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
References
[1] Aricept (donepezil hydrochloride) [label]. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
drugsatfda_docs/label/2012/020690s035.021720s008.022568s005lbl.pdf ;2 0 1 2
[Accessed 4 April 2017].[2]Birks J, Harvey RJ. Donepezil for dementia due to Alzheimer's disease. Cochrane Da-
tabase Syst Rev 2006;1:CD001190.
[3]Hebert LE, Weuve J, Scherr PA, Evans DA. Alzheimer disease in the United States(2010 –2050) estimated using the 2010 census. Neurology 2013;80(19):1778 –83.
[4]Cacabelos Ramon. Donepezil in Alzheimer's disease: from conventional trials topharmacogenetics. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2007;3(3):303 –33.
[5]Wilkinson DG, Francis PT, Schwam E, Payne-Parrish J. Cholinesterase inhibitors usedin the treatment of Alzheimer's disease: the relationship between pharmacologicaleffects and clinical ef ﬁcacy. Drugs Aging 2004;21(7):453 –78.
[6]Birks J, Malouf Reem. Donepezil for vascular cognitive impairment. Cochrane Data-base Syst Rev 2004;1:CD004395.
[7]Birks JS. Cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer's disease. Cochrane Database SystRev 2006;1:CD005593.
[8]Greene YM, Noviasky J, Tariot PN. Donepezil overdose. J Clin Psychiatry 1999;60(1):
56–7.
[9]Shepherd G, Klein-Schwartz W, Edwards R. Donepezil overdose: a tenfold dosingerror. Ann Pharmacother 1999;33(7 –8):812 –5.
[10] Garlich FM, Balakrishnan K, Shah SK, Howland MA, Fong J, Nelson LS. Prolonged al-
tered mental status and bradycardia following pediatric donepezil ingestion. Clin
Toxicol (Phila) 2014;52(4):291 –4.
[11] Winslow B, Onysko M, Stob C, Hazlewood K. Treatment of Alzheimer disease. AmFam Physician 2011;83(12):1403 –12.
[12] Tanaka A, Koga S, Hiramatsu Y. Donepezil-induced adverse side effects of cardiacrhythm: 2 cases report of atrioventricular block and Torsade de Pointes. Intern
Med 2009;48(14):1219 –23.
[13] Takaya T, Okamoto M, Yodoi K, Hata K, Kijima Y, Nakajima H, et al. Torsades de
Pointes with QT prolongation related to donepezil use. J Cardiol 2009;54(3):507 –11.
[14] Yiannopoulou KG, Papageorgiou SG. Current and future treatments for Alzheimer'sdisease. Ther Adv Neurol Disord 2013;6(1):19 –33.3 A. Pourmand et al. / American Journal of Emergency Medicine xxx (2016) xxx –xxx
Please cite this article as: Pourmand A, et al, Cholinergic symptoms and QTc prolongation following donepezil overdose, American Journal of
Emergency Medicine (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2017.06.044

